# MATLAB for Scientific Data Exploration

The goal of the MATLAB nanocourse is to instruct the use of MATLAB as tool for scientific data management and exploration, while enabling the deciphering and navigation of complex data structures that are often generated by MATLAB-based software packages. This is NOT a MATLAB programming course, although for data exploration some minimal coding skills will be established. 

### What will be covered
- Overview of MATLAB as a data exploration tool (user interface, documentation, applications).
- Navigation of regular data using matrices. 
- Navigation of irregular data in dynamic structures.
- Design and implementation of data structures for irregular, complex information bases.

### Requirements
Beginner’s level familiarity with core elements of programming languages (loops, if-statements, functions). Applicants who are not familiar with these concepts are asked to work through these elements. The instructors recommend the following 3 – 4 hours 
[youtube video block for self-study](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6iN56l7dEMY&list=PLYdXvSx87cgRJfv6gZl7GjAs0GNvyg-uS) 

### Contacts
* Course Instructor: [Gaudenz Danuser, Ph.D](mailto:gaudenz.danuser@utsouthwestern.edu)
* Course Instructor: [Andrew Jamieson, Ph.D](mailto:andrew.jamieson@utsouthwestern.edu)
* Course TA: [Qiongjing (Jenny) Zou, Ph.D](mailto:Qiongjing.Zou@utsouthwestern.edu)
* Course Administration: [Rebekah Craig](mailto:rebekah.craig@utsouthwestern.edu)

### Schedule

Day 1  | **February 26th, 2019**  
Room NB2.100A

[*Course Material Cloud Link (password provided in class)*](https://cloud.biohpc.swmed.edu/index.php/s/Hq8hkssrhrWGbFB)

| Time  | Topic |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| 9:00 - 10:30 a.m.| Central elements of coding in MATLAB |
| 10:30 - 1:45 p.m.| MATLAB Code review exercise (including Lunch) |
| 1:45 - 2:00 p.m. | Presentation code review exercise |
| 2:00 - 3:00 p.m. | Review of Data Structures |
| 3:00 - 5:00 p.m. | Navigating results from an open source package [u-track](https://github.com/DanuserLab/u-track) |
| Homework | Download and read PhenoRipper paper: PMID: 22743764|

Day 2  | **February 27th, 2019**  
Room NB2.100A

[*Course Material Cloud Link (password provided in class)*](https://cloud.biohpc.swmed.edu/index.php/s/Hq8hkssrhrWGbFB)


| Time  | Topic |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| 9:00 - 10:30 a.m.| Some advanced concepts in programming with functions |
| 10:30 - 3:30 p.m.| Navigating the code of an open source package Phenoripper* (independent lunch) |
| End early for special campus lecture | |
__*Note we will provide a custom version of the PhenoRipper software via the [cloud link](https://cloud.biohpc.swmed.edu/index.php/s/Hq8hkssrhrWGbFB).__



--------

### How to Apply
Applicants please submit a max 400 word statement of interest with their potential use case of MATLAB. In addition, they please provide some account of previous programming experience or an expression of commitment that they will for at least 6 hours review the material of an online programming course or book. Based on this information the instructors will select max 15 participants. Selected applicants must commit to participation in the entire course. 

### Application Deadline: 
November 12

### Notification of Acceptance: 
November 16
